How do we go about understanding these very enigmatic tales known as the Four Branches of the Mabinogi in Welsh medieval culture?
What approaches should we take to best position ourselves to really get to grips with what these tales mean?
Well, there have been many people who have sought to understand the Four Branches of the Mabinogi in different ways
And of course, one of the first in many ways to really try and get to grips with where
the Mabinogi comes from and therefore try and tell us what they mean is W.J. Griffith.
And this is the second in a series looking at his book, Rhiannon, which is essentially
a series of lectures that he gave written down where he seeks to describe where the
first and third branches of the Mabinogi come from and what they mean, essentially what
the author was doing while he was trying to write them down or she was trying to write
them down.
And this can help us reflect on how we try and understand what these stories mean because
WJ Griffith, for all of his talents, all of his abilities, all of his research, all of
his very profound understanding of the Welsh literary tradition, actually came away from
these studies with some rather strange conclusions.
What does WJ Griffith have to say about Puig, the first part of the first branch of the
Mabinogi, which he calls Puich I. His main conclusion is basically that there is no connection
between part one of Puich, that is Puich's journey to Anov and his return, and part two
in their present form. Now part two is where Puich meets Rhiannon and they agree to get
married and there's the whole story of Guaol trying to win, Rhianon back and
then there's the whole story of Pridari etc etc. Part one describes one
independent incident in the life of the Lord of David which has no connection
whether stated or implied with the latter portion beyond the fact that the
same protagonist appears in both. Basically that Pu'i is one of the main characters in
that second part also. There are some indications to show that Pu'i-I was at one period in the
development of the Mabi-Nogion, an independent unit or indeed an independent branch.
Now I strongly disagree with this conclusion. For those of you who've sat the full branches course,
the Mabinogge course with me over the last few years, you'll know that we read the first branch
of the Mabinogge, parts one and part two, as one complete unit. Mainly because there are themes
that connect that part one with part two. Now it's not that W.J. Griffith was not an intelligent man,
it's not that W.J. Griffith was in many ways a very talented scholar, someone who was incredibly
well-read, someone who was well-versed in the Welsh tradition. It's just that he
begins from a particular assumption that forces him into this quite narrow-minded
and mistaken view of the four branches of the Mabinogi. He begins from the
assumption that the four branches are broken and this leads him to the
assumption that he has to fix the four branches in some way, and in trying to
fix them he makes this rather awful mess. He leaves quite a big tangle of
confusion. For those of you who might be reading along with Rhiannon you'll
probably understand why this first chapter is really confusing because
there are some real hoops we have to leap through to really get to grips with
what W.J. Griffith means. But don't worry we're not going to be spending too long
and the Confusions, we're going to be drawing out the best parts of his work on the Mabi
Noggi and seeing if we can use those parts to help us better understand our perspective
on the Mabi Noggi.
So WJ Griffith believes that this Irish story, the conception of Mongan, is fundamentally
much closer to the original version of the first branch than the first branch that's
been left to us. Now WJ Griffith has summarized many of the different versions that were written
down in Irish literature, roughly around a thousand years ago, and he's created this summary. So the
summary that I'm going to read for you now isn't necessarily an accurate telling of any of these
different versions that we find in the Irish literature roughly a thousand years ago. It's
really just his summary, his simplification of this Irish story. But it's worth just sticking
with his summary because otherwise we'd be here all night.
Fieghna Finn was king of Ireland and the man and man Macleod was king of the other world
or Lachlan. Lachlan is also sometimes Scandinavia or specifically Norway, the land of the Vikings
essentially. But in various parts of Irish literature it becomes the Otherworld, not
unlike Ireland becoming a place where the Otherworld manifests in the Welsh tradition.
Mananán was in love with Fiechner's wife, and this is the ruse by which he was enabled to lie
with her with her husband's consent. By a trick he compelled Fiechner to make war upon him.
And because he was king of the other world and had therefore control of all magic and enchantment
Fiechner was in danger of defeat and death
so basically
Manana and Macleod is pretending to be different people
He's gone to Fiechner and he's essentially said, oh, you know
You've got to attack that strange otherworldly king over there who was actually Manana Macleod and his kingdom
When things were at their worst,
he appeared before Fjechne on the battlefield as a tall warrior marvelously clad.
So of course, Fjechne is losing in the fight against the king of the other world,
unbeknownst to him, that being Mananann Macleir.
And while Fjechne is clearly losing, because he's a mortal fighting an immortal,
Mananann Macleir
takes on the disguise of a great warrior, a great marvelously clad warrior on the battlefield
who's going to claim to be able to help him in this fight.
He offered to help Fjechne to defeat his enemy, who was of course Mananann himself,
for a consideration.
Namely, that they should change forms,
and that Mananann should go to Ireland to Fjechne's fort,
in Fjöhne's form and sleep with Fjöhne's wife. So basically, Mananán has created this illusion
of a war and in the middle of the fight when Fjöhne is losing the battle, Mananán appears to him and
says, "Well, I'll help you. I'll make sure that you win the war, but you've got to let me sleep
with your wife. And to do that, I will take on your form, your shape, your face, and go there in
your form so that your wife isn't shamed. He said, 'I shall go there in thy shape so
that thy wife shall not be defiled by it.' So it was agreed, and Fjechna, in Mananaan's
form, was able to conquer his enemy and seize the kingship of Lachlan. At the same time,
Fjechna's wife became pregnant by Mananaan in Fjechna's form.
the child Mongan, born to Fyakhna's wife, was the son of Mananan, though he was also the son of Fyakhna,
because he was begotten by Mananan in Fyakhna's form. Then Mananan came and stole his son Mongan
when he was three nights old and took him to the other world where he kept him for 12 years. Now
we'll see how this summary of the story by W.J. Griffith is actually very similar to the first
branch of the Mabinogi, and in particular we'll see how this can help us understand
the mythology that sits behind the first branch of the Mabinogi.
So this is Griffith's comparison of the conception of Mongan and Poil story, but simplified.
There was nothing wrong with Griffith's original illustration of this similarity, it's just that
it's easier for me to present it in this way. So I've simplified it a bit, I've refined it a little
bit essentially, so it's easier for us to understand. Fundamentally, the comparison begins with the fact
that these are both stories concerning mortal kings, point one there, that meet the immortal
kings of the other world, Manan and Macleear and Aran respectively. This king of the other world
has contrived their meeting so as to achieve a specific purpose. Now in the story of Mongan,
this is to contrive a war between the two kingdoms, to draw Fjachna into battle, basically so that
Mananaan Maclir can put Fjachna in a situation where he's forced to let Mananaan sleep with
his wife. Of course, in the first branch with Puich, we could say that Aarang contrives the
situation whereby Puich feels like he's obliged to do right for taking Aaron's stag.
Of course the reason he does this is so that Puich will kill his old adversary, Havgan.
So point five there. One of the characters takes on the other's enemy, and of course this is
different in the story of Mongan because it's the immortal Mananaan who takes on the mortal
Fjöhne's enemy, whereas in the first branch of the Mabinogi it's the mortal Puig who takes on
the immortal Aräun's enemy that being Havgan. And then point six there, so to accomplish
this fight they both exchange formed appearance. Now Mananann becomes Fjöhne and Puig becomes
add on to the mortal and the immortal exchange places. But from here on out the exchange actually
is different in each story because point seven there in the other's form they encounter the
other's wife. Now it's Mananan who has intercourse with Fjachner's wife. It's the immortal who
encounters the mortal's wife, 'prin the Mabinogi', it's the mortal who encounters
the immortal's wife, it's the other way around yeah, so Puich refrains from
intercourse with Aaron's wife, whereas Mananaan has intercourse with
Fiachna's wife, there's another difference there too. Then point eight, the enemy is
defeated, now this is in a slightly different sequence in both stories but
fundamentally this is what happens. Fiyachna in Mananaan's form defeats his
enemy and Pu'uch in Aaron's form defeats Havgan. And then just the last section of
both stories, the kingdoms are taken so Fiyachna takes his enemy's kingdom, Pu'uch
unites the two kingdoms of Anon and this is also slightly out of sequence in both
stories here, but a child is born of the union. Now, Mongan is born to Mananan and Fjechna's wife,
but of course this section is later in the first branch of the Mabinogi. According to W.J. Griffiths'
scheme, his division of the first branch, this actually takes place in the second part of the
first branch in Puich II. And essentially the birth is to Rhiannon and Puich, but Puich
is Penanovn. So it's kind of similar in that Puich is named the king of the other world,
whereas in the story of Mongan it's actually the king of the other world, Mananán Macleer,
who was the father. Then point 11 there, the mortal returns. There is a return to normality.
Fjachna thanks his wife for all she's done for him and Aran's wife also has some input in the
story here. She tells him how good a friend he has in Puig. Now this last section is part of the
Mongan story but isn't part of Puig I yet, it's part of Puig II. So the child is taken by the
immortal father to the other world. Mananan takes Mongan and then returns him after 12 years.
Gori or Praderi, Rhiannon and Puil's child, is taken from Rhiannon and it is as if it's the
other world taking the child because that's the episode with the monster claw in the first
branch of the Mabinogi. Now I believe that even though this is actually a pretty good comparison,
I think we could simplify this comparison even further. I would say that the underlying structure
that we find in both stories is that one, a mortal exchanges places with an immortal,
two, an act of violence is part of the exchange, so an actual full-on war, in Fjöhne's case,
and just mortal combat at the ford for Puig. There is a matter of fidelity with one of their spouses,
So in the story of Mon Gann, the matter of fidelity is concerned with Fjöhne's wife,
the mortal wife. In the story of Puig going to Annuven, fidelity is a matter that arises with
Aran's wife. Puig acts with fidelity towards this woman who believes he is her husband.
She thinks this is Aran, yeah, so she would gladly make love to him. But of course it's Puig,
and poets respect that fidelity. The next part of the story is that a special child is born.
Of course in the Mabi Noggi the special child is born later on, it's part of a different sequence
of events. But then of course what's similar between both stories is that the child disappears
and is then recovered. And I could of course put there that super nature has something to do with
this disappearance. It's Mananan Macleer, the king of the otherworld who steals the child
in the story of Mongan, and it's the monster claw, the otherworldly monster who steals
Pianan and Poeltschild in the Mabinogi. How do you know if you're dealing with a
genuine Celtic tradition or not? The only way to be certain is to study the primary sources yourself.
The best way to do that is to follow a course with an experienced teacher such as myself.
There are plenty of courses that you can follow with me at the website keltyksource.online.
There's also a free course there for you to try out if you want to see what type of thing I get
up to. It's a course on the goddess of sovereignty, a long history of the goddess from the earliest
Indo-European sources all the way through to the Irish and Welsh medieval sources. Enjoy!
Now, these are the materials that we have. How can we make sense of both what W.J. Griffith is
saying, what his mistakes are, and how can we sort of develop our own thinking about this
remarkable similarity between these two stories.
First of all, what's W.J. Griffith doing wrong here? Well, he believes that the story of
Mongan is closer to the original version. Whatever that original version is,
W.J. Griffith believes that sometime in the distant past, there was a story which essentially
corresponds to the summary he gives. I would say that the comparative practice that W.J.
Griffith is following here is incredibly powerful and useful. Not to try and decide if there was
an original perfect pure story that then became contaminated and broken in different ways.
I would say that the similarities instead reveal what I would call a structure of belief.
I would say that it looks like a belief that was common to both the Welsh and the Irish traditions.
Perhaps both the Welsh and the Irish inherited this type of religious narrative from their
ancestors in the earlier Indo-European cultures of Europe. It's not that there was one original
narrative, that there was one original unique storyteller who told this story first.
I would say that this is one stage in a very long evolution of mythology, a very long evolution of
religious narratives that occurs over many thousands of years. So to say that there is
an original version and that this is it is kind of missing the point because religious narratives,
myths are the result of a long series of different evolutions of different
storytellers and artists feeding in to this communal type of story that evolves
slowly but surely over time. So I would say that what WJ Griffith has revealed
isn't necessarily an original unique story told by an original unique
storyteller, it's really a basic underlying structure of belief which is
let's say one episode in a long evolution of mythology. Now this underlying
mythology gives rise to many many different variations, many many different
types of telling of this very basic type of story appears in both the Welsh and
Irish traditions and that's why they are similar. Not because they've necessarily evolved out of an
original story that looks like this but because they're both seeking to express this underlying
structure of belief. A storyteller can use a story to convey a myth. The myth isn't the story itself,
Yeah, the story is just a description of events. The myth is the body of values and
concepts and beliefs that are evoked in the story. Yeah?
Now what this means is, is that a storyteller can tell a story and evoke a particular type of myth.
Another storyteller can tell more or less the same story, but tell it in such a way that they
stress a different part of the mythology. So for example, one storyteller telling the story of Pois
might stress the martial prowess of the young man and evoke the mythology of the warrior ideal.
Another storyteller may stress those aspects of the story which sort of confirm the meaning of Pois'
name. Poets name in Welsh means wisdom, caution, patience. Evoking the values of
self-control, of self-awareness, of self-knowledge. Same story, plot more or
less, but different stresses in the values and the concepts, the mythology
that's being evoked. In the story of Mongan it's far more about the
otherworldly king tricking the mortal to let him sleep with his wife. That's one
way of stressing that basic mythology. In the story of Pouish it's not so much
about tricking the mortal, it's about finding honor and dignity and value in
the way that the mortal behaves in the other world. So we have similar
stories which contain a similar structure of belief which gives different storytellers
different choices different ways of stressing the stories different variations of the story
and also different variations of the myth that they contain that they evoke yeah this is what gives us
the great diversity in the different storytelling traditions it's a variety and a diversity of
actual stories and the actual mythology that they evoke also.
